The email had arrived. For months I had been speculating about what obscure physical and psychological ailments I had been genetically endowed with, and at last, with indisputable evidence in hand, I was ready to confirm my as of yet medically-unfounded ideations.

Three weeks ago I spit into a plastic container and sent it to a facility in California for processing. One million points in my genetic code that contribute to variation among the human species (termed single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs) were going to be analyzed. The data that I would receive back, essentially one million pairs of letters, would give me information about disease risks, traits, and my ancestry thanks to countless association studies. 

I clicked the link in the email, signed into my account, and headed straight for the disease risk section. My excitement quickly turned into a mixture of disappointment and relief as I began deciphering the risk factor analysis behind the diseases that experts had concluded I was most at risk of developing.  Out of the thirty diseases that 23andMe had tagged as "established research" I was only at risk of developing four: two cardiovascular-related conditions, rheumatoid arthritis, and a skin condition. Moreover, my risk of developing these four disorders ranged from 1.24 to 2.20 times the average risk and for some resulted in a percentage increase of less than 1% above the average risk - hardly anything to get worked up about.

I decided to check my carrier status next.  If I had a variant present, maybe I possessed some well-documented case of a heterozygote advantage. Sickle-cell anemia is a devastating disease, but those who carry only one mutated copy of the gene in question don't develop the illness and are imparted with a resistance to malaria. Another wave of disappointment and relief. All variants were absent.

I then turned to the section on traits and quickly confirmed that the data was indeed mine.  I was informed that I likely had curly hair (I do) and that I am likely lactose intolerant and have an increased sensitivity to caffeine (things I had long suspected).  I received a quick ego boost when I learned that in both studies correlating genetic information to intelligence I possessed the polymorphism that resulted in higher IQ test scores than those without the alteration. Some fifty other traits were also reported, but a large number of them either unreliable or irrelevant.

So enough about me, was it worth it? Yes, but don't expect your results to be the holy grail of self-knowledge. For $200, I ruled out a lot of known markers for diseases and can now point to a genetic basis for several traits and conditions I had suspected of having. I also read some interesting information about my ancestry and will continue to receive free updates as more discoveries correlating genetic information to risks and traits are made. 23andMe also allows you to download the raw data, giving you the option of consulting the information when reading scientific manuscripts or processing the data using third-party programs. The latter option is particularly useful, and one such program called Promethease generates a report based on a crowd-sourced wiki that links SNPs to scientific findings. Running my data through this program did afford a number of interesting findings that 23andMe did not choose to include on their site.

That being said, I do have some complaints for those wanting to use services like 23andMe.  One of the things that 23andMe does really well is culling the insane amount of data that is out there and presenting it in a easily digested and informative manner.  Most of the diseases even have accompanying pages featuring feedback from a doctor or researcher trained in the relevant area. The site is sort of an information overload when you first visit, but the nature of the site demands it, and there is no harm in choosing to take it all in over the course of multiple weeks.  23andMe also does a great job giving some background on genetics for those that wish to seek it out.  They recently partnered with Khan Academy (a very smart marketing move) to produce a series of videos on genetics that also exist as part of 23andMe's FAQ.  Coming from a background with plenty of biology, much of the content is extremely basic and oversimplified, but it does give a good, quick overview of the fundamental concepts needed to interpret the results.  What I believe the site does a poor job with is giving the customer an accurate picture of the state of research in genetic correlation studies. 23andMe has this to say about it in their FAQ:

> An association study is a study in which researchers test for an association between a factor or variable and an outcome. For example, researchers have found an association between drinking coffee and a reduced risk for type 2 diabetes.

> A genetic association study is a particular kind of association study in which the factor examined is the sequence of a particular gene or SNP. Most of the Health and Traits reports are based on genetic association studies, in which researchers test for associations between genes/SNPs and outcomes such as eye color or risk for heart disease.

> It is important to remember that a genetic association with a condition does not mean genetics cause  a specific outcome. An often-used example is the association between the increase in global temperature and the decrease in the number of pirates since the 1800s. While the separate facts are true, they do not imply that the temperature increase caused the decrease in the number of pirates. Other factors are likely to be responsible for the demise of the pirate population.

> Even in the type 2 diabetes example, we cannot yet say that drinking coffee causes the reduction in an individual’s risk for diabetes. Perhaps people who drink more coffee also drink less fruit juice or soda, and the decrease in sugar intake reduces the risk of diabetes. Often, association studies are the first studies to show a link between a factor and an outcome, and additional research is needed to show whether the factor has a causal effect. 

Ok, they do a good job of hammering home the fact that correlation does not equal causation. But what about mentioning the complex interaction of many genes in determining certain traits and diseases or the consequences of epigenetics? This type of background information is critical in interpreting the results from this site, and a quick visit to the community discussion forums shows just how uninformed people are of the bigger picture. If this information is somewhere on the site it needs to be made more prominent. 

To conclude, I would highly suggest that you go ahead and get this analysis done. The amount of data (1 million SNPs) you receive for the price (now at $300) is a great deal, and the value of the information will only grow as more findings are made.
